**Prioritizing adverse drug reaction and drug repositioning candidates generated by literature-based discovery**
-Majid Rastegar-Mojarad, Ravikumar Komandur Elayavilli, Liwei Wang, Rashmi Prasad, Hongfang Liu

Rastegar-Mojarad, Majid, et al. "Prioritizing adverse drug reaction and drug repositioning candidates generated by literature-based discovery." Proceedings of the 7th ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics. ACM, 2016.

Abstract

- focused on discovering drug-disease relations, which have potential to identify drug repositioning candidates or adverse drug reactions.

- used drug-gene and gene-disease semantic prediction in SemMedDB ad causal finding and Swanson's ABC model to generate potential drug-disease relations

- - Swanson's ABC model for generating new hypotheses by cross-referencing findings from different articles.
  - the discovery process starts with mining associations between A - B and B - C from literature -> combine

- we trained and tested out classifier for three different purposes: drug repositioning, adverse drug events, drug-disease relation detection.

Introduction

- Literature-Based Discovery: 1) extracting findings from scientific literature 2) generating new hypotheses 3) prioritizing and ranking the hypotheses


Related work

- identifying (starting, linking, and target) concepts in text and extracting the relationships between: co-occurrence, association rules, term frequency-inverse document frequency, Z-score, and mutual information

- another approach is using semantic prediction. A semantic prediction is a "subject - predicate - object" triple extracted from biomedical literature. Subject and object are biomedical concepts from the UMLS Metathesaurus and predicate is a relation from the UMLS semantic Network.

- - SemMedDB

- using semantic predications instead of a co-occurrence approach generated a smaller number of false positive discoveries and provide an explanation to support the findings.

- Wren proposed a method called average minimum weight which computes a weight for each discovery based on mutual information. Pratt suggested using the number of linking concepts between A and C for ranking discoveries.- Linking term count(LTC)


Materials and methods

- we selected drug as the starting concept(A), gene as the linking concept(B), and disease as the target(C).

- - ex) Dexamethasone (drug), inhibits, muc5ac + Muc5ac(gene), causes, corneal ulcer(disease)

Classifier for ranking hypotheses

- ranked based on their likelihood of being true drug repositioning candidates
- binary classifier - positive or negative classes
- by Weka training model

- ranking: 
  1. if 5 semantic predications show a relation between drug A - gene B and 3 predictions illustrate a relation between gene B - disease C then 15 (3*5) different pairs of casual predictions lead to potential drug A - disease C relation.
  2. counting the pairs of casual sentences classified as positive.
  3. rank based on number of positive instances

